README.md, before:

# Writing

A public place for quick unpolished writing. Topics include: 

* Jevko and other syntaxes,
* technology, computer languages, formats,
* design, life, thoughts, philosophy.

See [djedr.github.io/writing](https://djedr.github.io/writing.html) and [xtao.org/blog](https://xtao.org/blog.html) for more polished writing by me. Some of the writing here may eventually get republished there.

**Note**: you can view these writings [directly on GitHub](https://github.com/jevko/writing) or [thru a GitHub page](https://jevko.github.io/writing/) -- it's generally better to do so directly, because GitHub pages don't do syntax highlighting and don't render math formulas, making them unreadable.

## Selected technical

[2023-07-23 "Exploring Simplified Lambda Calculus Notations: Revelation"](https://jevko.github.io/writing/2023-07-23-revelation.html) (HTML). Or [Markdown](2023-07-23-revelation.md).

[2023-07-21 "Exploring Simplified Lambda Calculus Notations: Summary"](https://jevko.github.io/writing/2023-07-20-lambda.html) (HTML). Or [Markdown](2023-07-19-lambda-notation-mvp.md).

[2023-02-09 The Ecosystem Paradox](2023-02-09-ecosystem-paradox.md)

[2023-02-01 The BLAST programming language](2023-02-01-blast.md)

[2023-01-25 Programming with DNA](2023-01-25-programming-with-dna.md)

[2022-06-11 Celebrating 1000000 years of Lisp: simplifying S-expressions](2022-06-11-s-exp-simplified.md)

[2022-01-23 Encoding hexadecimal numbers with 10 digits](2022-01-23-hex.md)

[2022-01-21 Some differences between XML and JSON](2022-01-21-json-vs-xml.md)

[2022-01-17 Semantics of XML attributes](2022-01-17-xml-attrs.md)

[2022-01-12 How many data types does it take to change a lightbulb?](2022-01-12-lightbulb.md)

[2022-01-09 XML vs JSON trends as of 2022](2022-01-09-xml-json-trends.md)

[2022-01-08 Restrictions of JSON numbers](2022-01-08-json-number-restrictions.md)

[2022-01-07 Meaningful data interchange in JSON](2022-01-07-meaningful-json.md)

[2022-01-07 IEEE754 numbers in JSON: NaN or Infinity](2022-01-07-infinity-nan-json.md)

[2022-01-04 Large numbers in JSON](2022-01-04-large-numbers-in-json.md)

## About Jevko

[2023-07-23 Alternative useful grammar for Jevko](2023-07-23-alternative-jevko.md)

[2022-02-06 Some semantic analogies to syntactic constructs in Jevko](2022-02-06-jevko-analogies.md)

[2022-01-22 Hacking XML attributes with Jevko](2022-01-22-xml-jevko-attrs.md)

[2022-01-20 The low and high level Jevko grammars](2022-01-20-jevko-grammar.md)

[2022-01-17 Jevko as ultra-compact XML, take 2](2022-01-17-compact-xml.md)

[2022-01-13 Jevko as ultra-compact XML](2022-01-13-xml.md)

[2022-01-13 A vision of total intercommunication of all software systems](2022-01-13-vision.md)

[2022-01-12 New year, new logo for Jevko?](2022-01-12-logo.md)

[2022-01-10 A mapping between Jevko and visual trees](2022-01-10-jevko-visual-parse-trees.md)

[2023-01-14 Draft: The Jevko document from heaven (Jevko compared to YAML)](draft-2023-01-14-jevko-vs-yaml.md)

[2022-01-24 Horse and carriage](draft-2022-01-24-horse.md)

## Selected nontechnical

[2023-01-30 Common Business Communication Language](2023-01-30-cbcl.md)

[2023-01-29 Magic and religion in informatics](2023-01-29-magic-and-religion-in-informatics.md)

[2023-01-28 Programming as magic](2023-01-28-programming-as-magic.md)

[2023-01-27 Fungi get you in the end](2023-01-27-fungi.md)

[2023-01-19 Paradox might be fundamental](2023-01-19-paradox.md)

[2023-01-19 Rules of logic are not fundamental](2023-01-19-logic.md)

[2023-01-17 Truth and simplicity go together](2023-01-17-simplicity-and-truth.md)

[2023-01-12 The Free Will Wager](draft-2023-01-12-free-will.md)

[2023-01-05 Simple modular elements connected together into increasingly complex forms](draft-2023-01-05-simple-to-complex.md)

[2023-01-04 Little green squares](draft-2023-01-04-little-green-squares.md)

<!-- todo: make the list below nicer by replacing filenames with titles -->

## Unsorted

<!-- [2023-07-20-lambda.html](2023-07-20-lambda.html) -->
<!--  -->
<!-- [2023-07-19-lambda-notation.md](2023-07-19-lambda-notation.md) -->
<!--  -->
<!-- [2023-07-16-css2.md](2023-07-16-css2.md) -->
<!--  -->
<!-- [2023-07-14-css.md](2023-07-14-css.md) -->

[2023-06-15-affix-syntax.md](2023-06-15-affix-syntax.md)

[2023-05-16-ostra.md](2023-05-16-ostra.md)

[2023-02-01-nano-standard.md](2023-02-01-nano-standard.md)

[2023-01-31-universality.md](2023-01-31-universality.md)

[2023-01-31-standard.md](2023-01-31-standard.md)

[2023-01-26-rational.md](2023-01-26-rational.md)

[2023-01-26-interactions.md](2023-01-26-interactions.md)

[2023-01-26-cosmic-explosion.md](2023-01-26-cosmic-explosion.md)

[2023-01-17-jsx.md](2023-01-17-jsx.md)

[2023-01-17-adoption.md](2023-01-17-adoption.md)

[2023-01-08-habits.md](2023-01-08-habits.md)

[2022-01-04-sexpr-subreddit.md](2022-01-04-sexpr-subreddit.md)

These are marked as drafts, although the distinction is mostly dependent on my mood when naming the file:

[draft-2023-01-16-explicit-semantics.md](draft-2023-01-16-explicit-semantics.md)

[draft-2022-12-21-whitespace.md](draft-2022-12-21-whitespace.md)

[draft-2022-01-28-mdif.md](draft-2022-01-28-mdif.md)

[draft-2022-01-16-bare-xml.md](draft-2022-01-16-bare-xml.md)

[draft-2022-01-14-bare-xml.md](draft-2022-01-14-bare-xml.md)

***

© 2022-2023 Darius J Chuck

Commit message:

Revelation: Lambda Calculus Reduced To Four Primitive Operations edited title and contents

README.md, after:

# Writing

A public place for quick unpolished writing. Topics include: 

* Jevko and other syntaxes,
* technology, computer languages, formats,
* design, life, thoughts, philosophy.

See [djedr.github.io/writing](https://djedr.github.io/writing.html) and [xtao.org/blog](https://xtao.org/blog.html) for more polished writing by me. Some of the writing here may eventually get republished there.

**Note**: you can view these writings [directly on GitHub](https://github.com/jevko/writing) or [thru a GitHub page](https://jevko.github.io/writing/) -- it's generally better to do so directly, because GitHub pages don't do syntax highlighting and don't render math formulas, making them unreadable.

## Selected technical

[2023-07-23 "Revelation: Lambda Calculus Reduced To Four Primitive Operations"](https://jevko.github.io/writing/2023-07-23-revelation.html) (HTML). Or [Markdown](2023-07-23-revelation.md).

[2023-07-21 "Exploring Simplified Lambda Calculus Notations: Summary"](https://jevko.github.io/writing/2023-07-20-lambda.html) (HTML). Or [Markdown](2023-07-19-lambda-notation-mvp.md).

[2023-02-09 The Ecosystem Paradox](2023-02-09-ecosystem-paradox.md)

[2023-02-01 The BLAST programming language](2023-02-01-blast.md)

[2023-01-25 Programming with DNA](2023-01-25-programming-with-dna.md)

[2022-06-11 Celebrating 1000000 years of Lisp: simplifying S-expressions](2022-06-11-s-exp-simplified.md)

[2022-01-23 Encoding hexadecimal numbers with 10 digits](2022-01-23-hex.md)

[2022-01-21 Some differences between XML and JSON](2022-01-21-json-vs-xml.md)

[2022-01-17 Semantics of XML attributes](2022-01-17-xml-attrs.md)

[2022-01-12 How many data types does it take to change a lightbulb?](2022-01-12-lightbulb.md)

[2022-01-09 XML vs JSON trends as of 2022](2022-01-09-xml-json-trends.md)

[2022-01-08 Restrictions of JSON numbers](2022-01-08-json-number-restrictions.md)

[2022-01-07 Meaningful data interchange in JSON](2022-01-07-meaningful-json.md)

[2022-01-07 IEEE754 numbers in JSON: NaN or Infinity](2022-01-07-infinity-nan-json.md)

[2022-01-04 Large numbers in JSON](2022-01-04-large-numbers-in-json.md)

## About Jevko

[2023-07-23 Alternative useful grammar for Jevko](2023-07-23-alternative-jevko.md)

[2022-02-06 Some semantic analogies to syntactic constructs in Jevko](2022-02-06-jevko-analogies.md)

[2022-01-22 Hacking XML attributes with Jevko](2022-01-22-xml-jevko-attrs.md)

[2022-01-20 The low and high level Jevko grammars](2022-01-20-jevko-grammar.md)

[2022-01-17 Jevko as ultra-compact XML, take 2](2022-01-17-compact-xml.md)

[2022-01-13 Jevko as ultra-compact XML](2022-01-13-xml.md)

[2022-01-13 A vision of total intercommunication of all software systems](2022-01-13-vision.md)

[2022-01-12 New year, new logo for Jevko?](2022-01-12-logo.md)

[2022-01-10 A mapping between Jevko and visual trees](2022-01-10-jevko-visual-parse-trees.md)

[2023-01-14 Draft: The Jevko document from heaven (Jevko compared to YAML)](draft-2023-01-14-jevko-vs-yaml.md)

[2022-01-24 Horse and carriage](draft-2022-01-24-horse.md)

## Selected nontechnical

[2023-01-30 Common Business Communication Language](2023-01-30-cbcl.md)

[2023-01-29 Magic and religion in informatics](2023-01-29-magic-and-religion-in-informatics.md)

[2023-01-28 Programming as magic](2023-01-28-programming-as-magic.md)

[2023-01-27 Fungi get you in the end](2023-01-27-fungi.md)

[2023-01-19 Paradox might be fundamental](2023-01-19-paradox.md)

[2023-01-19 Rules of logic are not fundamental](2023-01-19-logic.md)

[2023-01-17 Truth and simplicity go together](2023-01-17-simplicity-and-truth.md)

[2023-01-12 The Free Will Wager](draft-2023-01-12-free-will.md)

[2023-01-05 Simple modular elements connected together into increasingly complex forms](draft-2023-01-05-simple-to-complex.md)

[2023-01-04 Little green squares](draft-2023-01-04-little-green-squares.md)

<!-- todo: make the list below nicer by replacing filenames with titles -->

## Unsorted

<!-- [2023-07-20-lambda.html](2023-07-20-lambda.html) -->
<!--  -->
<!-- [2023-07-19-lambda-notation.md](2023-07-19-lambda-notation.md) -->
<!--  -->
<!-- [2023-07-16-css2.md](2023-07-16-css2.md) -->
<!--  -->
<!-- [2023-07-14-css.md](2023-07-14-css.md) -->

[2023-06-15-affix-syntax.md](2023-06-15-affix-syntax.md)

[2023-05-16-ostra.md](2023-05-16-ostra.md)

[2023-02-01-nano-standard.md](2023-02-01-nano-standard.md)

[2023-01-31-universality.md](2023-01-31-universality.md)

[2023-01-31-standard.md](2023-01-31-standard.md)

[2023-01-26-rational.md](2023-01-26-rational.md)

[2023-01-26-interactions.md](2023-01-26-interactions.md)

[2023-01-26-cosmic-explosion.md](2023-01-26-cosmic-explosion.md)

[2023-01-17-jsx.md](2023-01-17-jsx.md)

[2023-01-17-adoption.md](2023-01-17-adoption.md)

[2023-01-08-habits.md](2023-01-08-habits.md)

[2022-01-04-sexpr-subreddit.md](2022-01-04-sexpr-subreddit.md)

These are marked as drafts, although the distinction is mostly dependent on my mood when naming the file:

[draft-2023-01-16-explicit-semantics.md](draft-2023-01-16-explicit-semantics.md)

[draft-2022-12-21-whitespace.md](draft-2022-12-21-whitespace.md)

[draft-2022-01-28-mdif.md](draft-2022-01-28-mdif.md)

[draft-2022-01-16-bare-xml.md](draft-2022-01-16-bare-xml.md)

[draft-2022-01-14-bare-xml.md](draft-2022-01-14-bare-xml.md)

***

© 2022-2023 Darius J Chuck
